1. You have asked me, Lucilius,* why, if the world is governed
by providence, it is still the case that good men suffer from many
misfortunes. This question would receive a more fitting answer in a
coherent work that set out to prove that providence does preside over
us all and that God concerns himself with us; but since your wish is
that a small part be severed from the whole and that I refute a single
objection without tackling the main question, I shall turn my hand to
a task that is not difficult—it is the gods’ cause I shall be pleading.
It is superfluous for present purposes to show that this great edifice
of the world does not stand without some power to guard it, or that
the stars that assemble and disperse above us are not propelled by
chance; that, though bodies whose motion is due to accident frequently
become disordered and swiftly collide, our rapidly revolving heavens,
governed as they are by eternal law, proceed without hindrance,
displaying so many things by land and sea, so many radiant lights in
the sky all gleaming in fixed order; that this system is not produced
by matter which moves randomly, and that such combinations as do
result from chance are not dependent on the great artistry that makes
the earth with all its mighty weight remain stationary, observing the
swift passage of the heavens as they whirl around it, that makes the
seas, flooding the valleys, soften the land, and feel no increase from
the rivers, and makes enormous growths arise from the smallest
seeds. Not even those natural events which appear capricious and
undetermined—I mean showers of rain and clouds, the strokes of
crashing thunderbolts and the fires that leap up from shattered
mountain peaks, the tremors of the ground when it quakes, and the
other motions caused around the earth by the violent element in
nature—not even those occur without reason, however suddenly
they occur; no, they too have specific causes, in the same way as
phenomena which are taken to be miraculous because the setting in
which we see them happen is so incongruous—I mean warm waters
in the middle of sea waves, and chains of new islands springing up in
the vastness of the ocean. Again, if anyone observes how shores are
laid bare as the sea withdraws into itself, and yet are covered again in
the shortest of time, he will believe it is some unseen fluctuation that
causes the waves now to diminish and flow inwards, now to burst
forth and with a great surge reclaim their former home; but in fact
the waves increase by degrees, approaching to the hour and day
proportionately larger or smaller in volume as they are attracted by
the star we call the moon, whose power controls the ocean’s surge.
But let matters such as this be kept for their proper time, all the more so
as you do not question the existence of providence but complain of it.
I shall restore you to good relations with the gods, who are best to
the best of men. For it is not Nature’s way to let good ever do harm
to good; between good men and the gods exists a friendship sealed by
virtue. Friendship, do I say? No, rather it is a bond of relationship
and similarity, since undoubtedly a good man differs from God only
in the sphere of time; he is God’s pupil and imitator, his true offspring
whom that illustrious parent, no gentle trainer in virtue, rears with
severity, as strict fathers do. And so, when you see good men of whom
the gods approve toiling and sweating, with a steep road to climb, and
bad men, on the other hand, enjoying themselves, surrounded by
pleasures, consider that our sons please us by their self-control, but
our house-slaves by their free spirit, that we restrain the former by
tighter discipline and nurture the latter’s boldness of manner. It is no
different with God, let me assure you: he does not pamper a good
man like a favourite slave; he puts him to the test, hardens him, and
makes him ready for his service.
2. ‘Why do many reversals of fortune happen to good men?’
Nothing bad can happen to a good man: opposites do not mix. Just
as the vast number of rivers, all the rain that falls in showers from
above, and the massive volume of mineral springs do not alter the
taste of the sea, do not even moderate it, so adversity’s onslaughts are
powerless to affect the spirit of a brave man: it remains unshaken and
makes all events assume its own colour; for it is stronger than all
external forces. I do not mean that he is insensible to those forces but
that he conquers them, and as a man who in all else is calm and tranquil of mind he rises to face whatever attacks him. All adversity he
regards as a training exercise. Who, provided he is a man and intent
4 On Providence
on what is right, will shirk reasonable toil or show reluctance to face
duties involving danger? What man of energy does not find inactivity
a punishment? We see wrestlers, who concern themselves with physical strength, matching themselves with only the strongest opponents,
and requiring those who prepare them for a bout to use all their
strength against them; they expose themselves to blows and hurt,
and if they do not find one man to match them, they take on several
at a time. Excellence withers without an adversary: the time for us to
see how great it is, how much its force, is when it displays its power
through endurance. I assure you, good men should do the same: they
should not be afraid to face hardships and difficulties, or complain of
fate; whatever happens, good men should take it in good part, and
turn it to a good end; it is not what you endure that matters, but how
you endure it.
Do you not see how differently fathers and mothers show their
love? The father orders his children to be roused early to pursue their
studies, not allowing them to be idle even on a holiday, and wrings
from them sweat and sometimes tears; but the mother wants to cherish
them in her embrace and keep them out of the sun’s glare, and wishes
them never to know sadness, never to shed tears, never to toil. It is a
father’s heart that God shows to good men; he loves them in a manly
way, and says, ‘Let them know the pain of toil, of suffering, of loss,
so that they may acquire true strength.’ Bodies that have become fat
grow sluggish through lack of use, and not effort alone but even
movement and their very own weight cause them to fail. Prosperity
that is undiminished cannot withstand a single blow; but the man
who has struggled constantly against his own ills becomes hardened
by suffering and no misfortune makes him yield, indeed, if he falls,
he still fights on his knees. Are you surprised if that God who so
loves good men and wants them to be as good, as virtuous as possible,
assigns to them a fortune that will make them struggle? It causes me
no surprise if the gods are sometimes moved by the desire to view great
men struggling against some calamity. We humans at times enjoy the
sight of a courageous youth meeting the charge of some beast with his
spear-point, if without fear he stands up to a charging lion, and the
more honourable the young man who does so, the more pleasure we
take in the sight. But these are not the kind of actions that can make
the gods gaze on us, being merely childish things that amuse frivolous
humans; no, here is a spectacle worthy of God’s attention as he
On Providence 5
contemplates his own work, here is a contest worthy of God—a
brave man matched against bad fortune, all the more so if he has
made the challenge. I cannot, I say, imagine a finer spectacle on earth
for Jupiter to view, should he wish to turn his attention there, than
that of Cato,* when his cause had been shattered more than once
already, yet standing upright amid the ruins of the republic. ‘Let all
the world fall under one man’s sway,’ he said, ‘let Caesar’s legions
guard the land and his ships the sea, let his troops blockade the
city-gates, Cato has yet a means of escape: with one hand he will open
a broad path to freedom. This sword, that even civil war has not
sullied or stained with guilt, shall at last render good and noble service:
the freedom that it could not give to its country it will give to Cato!
Come, my soul, attempt the task you have long planned, set yourself
free from the world of men! Already Petreius and Juba* have clashed
in combat and lie slain, each by the other’s hand, a pact with fate that
shows courage and nobility, but would not suit my own greatness: for
Cato to ask for death at another’s hand is as shameful as to ask for
life.’ I am in no doubt that the gods looked on with great pleasure,
while that man, so fierce in avenging himself, took thought for the
safety of others and enabled his departing comrades to make their
escape; while he pursued his studies even on that final night; while
he drove the sword into his holy breast; while he spilled his guts and
with his hand gave passage to that most upright soul, so unworthy of
a sword’s defilement. This, I would like to believe, is why the wound
he dealt himself was not well-aimed or successful: it was not enough
for the immortal gods to gaze only once on Cato; his bravery was kept
in check and summoned again so that it might reveal itself in a harder
role; for it requires greater courage to seek death twice than once.
It must have pleased the gods to watch their pupil leaving life in such
a distinguished and memorable end. Death consecrates those men
whose death wins praise even from the fearful.
3. But as the discussion proceeds, I shall show how true evils are
not those which appear to be so: I now make this point, that the
things you call hardships, that you call adversities and detestable,
actually are of benefit, first to the very persons they happen to, and
secondly to the whole human race, which matters more to the gods
than individuals do; I also say that good men are willing that such things
should happen to them, and that, if they are unwilling, misfortune is
what they deserve. I will go further, and say that it is by destiny that
6 On Providence
these events occur in this way, and that they happen to good men by
the same law which is responsible for their being good. I will proceed
to persuade you never to feel pity for a good man; for men can call
him wretched, but he can never be so.
The most difficult of the propositions I put forward appears to be
the one I made first, that the things which induce fear and loathing
in us are of benefit to the very persons to whom they happen. ‘Is it to
our benefit’, you ask, ‘to be thrown into exile, to be reduced to poverty,
to follow the funeral procession of our children or wife, to suffer
public disgrace or be broken in health?’ If you are surprised that
these things are of benefit to a man, you will be surprised that surgery
and cautery, yes, and abstinence from food and drink, sometimes
make sick men whole. But if you reflect that, in order to effect a cure,
some men have their bones scraped and removed, and their veins
extracted, and that sometimes limbs are amputated which could not
be left without the whole body being destroyed, you will allow yourself to be convinced also of this fact, some things which are praised and
eagerly sought are bad for those who take delight in them, things very
like over-eating, drinking too much, and the other activities that kill
through pleasure. Among the many splendid sayings of our friend
Demetrius* there is this one, which I have recently heard—it still
sounds and rings in my ears: ‘Nothing’, he said, ‘seems to me more
unhappy than the man who has no experience of adversity.’ For he
has not been allowed to put himself to the test.
Although everything has flowed in his direction according to his
prayer, even before his prayer, yet the gods have passed an unfavourable
judgement on him: he was considered unworthy of ever gaining a
victory over Fortune, who draws back from all men with cowardly
hearts, as though she were saying: ‘Why should I select that fellow as
my opponent? He will lower his weapons at once; I have no need of
all my power against him—an idle threat will send him packing—he
cannot bear to look me in the eye. Let me search for another man I
can come to blows with: I am ashamed to fight a man who is ready to
yield the victory.’ A gladiator counts it shameful to be matched against
a lesser opponent, and knows that a victory won without danger is won
without fame. With Fortune it is the same: she looks for the bravest
men to match with her, and passes some men by with scorn. She
attacks all who are most unyielding and obdurate, men she can test
her strength against: she tried Mucius by fire, Fabricius by poverty,
On Providence 7
Rutilius by exile, Regulus by torture, Socrates by poison, Cato by
death.* Only bad fortune reveals a great example.
Is Mucius unfortunate because he seizes the fire of the enemy with
his right hand and exacts from himself punishment for his mistake,
because he routs with scorched hand the enemy he failed to rout with
armed hand? Tell me, would he be happier if he were warming his
hand in his mistress’s bosom?
Is Fabricius unfortunate because he tills his own fields, whenever
he gains respite from business of state? Because he wages war as much
on wealth as he does on Pyrrhus? Because he dines at his hearth on
those very roots and herbs he pulled up while cleaning off his land,
he, an old man honoured by a triumph? Tell me, would he be happier
if he heaped his belly with fish from a distant shore and fowl from
foreign parts, if he stirred his dyspeptic stomach from its torpor with
shellfish from the Adriatic and Tuscan seas, if he had wild game of the
first rank, taken at the cost of many a hunter’s life, served up to him
with a huge pile of fruit all around?
Is Rutilius unfortunate because the men who condemned him will be
pleading their case in every generation? Because he was more content
to endure his country’s loss of him than his own loss of exile? Because
he alone refused anything to the dictator Sulla and, when he was
recalled from banishment, he virtually withdrew and fled to a greater
distance? ‘Let those whom your “happy age” has caught in Rome’,
he said, ‘enjoy the sight of it: let them see the blood flowing in the
forum, the heads of senators placed above Servilius’ pool (for that is
where Sulla’s proscriptions* dispose of their victims), and gangs of
assassins roaming all over the city, and many thousands of Roman
citizens slaughtered in one place after, or rather because of, a guarantee
of security; let those who cannot undergo exile enjoy such sights.’
Tell me, is Lucius Sulla fortunate* because men are pushed out of his
path at sword-point as he makes his way down to the forum? Because
he allows the heads of men of consular rank to be shown to him and
makes the treasury official pay for the cost of their murder out of public
funds? And these are all the actions of the very man who proposed the
Cornelian law!*
Let us come to Regulus:* what harm did Fortune do to him in
making him an example of honesty, an example of endurance? His
skin is pierced by nails, and wherever he rests his exhausted frame he
lies upon a wound; his eyes stare out in unending sleeplessness: yet
8 On Providence
the greater his torture is, the greater will be his fame. Do you wish to
know how little he regrets that he set virtue at such a price? Set him
free from the cross and send him back to the senate: he will state the
same opinion. Do you, then, consider Maecenas a more fortunate
man, who, distressed by affairs of the heart and lamenting the daily
rebuffs of a cantankerous wife,* would seek sleep by means of harmonious music playing softly at a distance? Though he steeps his senses
in unmixed wine, and diverts his anxious mind with the sound of
water falling, beguiling it with a thousand pleasures, he will no more
find sleep on his pillow than Regulus on his cross; but while the one
has the consolation of enduring hardship for what is right and dwells
not on his suffering but on its cause, the other, enervated by pleasures
and encumbered with excessive good fortune, is tormented more by
the cause of his suffering than by what he suffers. The human race
has surely not become so subject to vice that there is any doubt that
more men would prefer to be born a Regulus than a Maecenas, if fate
permitted them the choice; or should there be anyone bold enough
to say he would rather have been born a Maecenas than a Regulus,
then that same fellow, though he deny it, would rather have been
born a Terentia.
In your opinion was Socrates badly treated because he drank down
the well-known drink that the Athenians mixed for him just as if it
was the elixir of immortality,* and discoursed on death right up to
the point when it claimed him? Was he ill-used because his blood
grew cold and gradually stopped pulsing in his veins, as the chill
stole over him? How much more should we envy him than those who
are served with goblets of gold, whose wine is diluted with snow held
above in a golden bowl by a catamite, trained to submit to any treatment,
his sexual parts removed or in abeyance! These men will measure out
whatever they have drunk in vomit, tasting anew with twisted lips
their own bile, but he will drink down poison cheerfully and with a
happy heart.
As far as Cato is concerned, enough has been said, and the consensus of men will grant that the fullest measure of happiness fell to that
man, whom Nature chose to be the one to confront her dreaded power.
‘The enmity of powerful men makes for hardship,’ she said: ‘let him
match himself against all three of Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus.* It is a
hardship to be overtaken by inferior men in competing for office: let him
come behind Vatinius.* It is a hardship to take part in civil wars: let him
On Providence 9
fight all the world over for a cause that is just, unsuccessful to the last
and stubborn to the last. It is a hardship to do violence to oneself: let
him do it. What shall I gain by this? That all may know that these
trials I have considered worthy of Cato are not true ills.’
4. Good fortune comes to common men and even to those of inferior talent; but only a great man is able to triumph over the disasters
and terrors afflicting mortal life. It is true that to be always happy and
to pass through life without any mental distress is to lack knowledge
of one half of nature. You are a great man: but on what do I base this
if Fortune denies you the opportunity to demonstrate your worth?
You have entered the lists at the Olympic Games, but you are the
only competitor: you win the crown, but the victory is not yours;
I congratulate you, but not as a brave man, rather as one who has
gained the office of consul or praetor: it is your personal standing that
has been enhanced. I can make the same point also to a good man, if
no more difficult circumstance has given him the chance to show his
mental strength: ‘You are unfortunate in my judgement, for you have
never been unfortunate. You have passed through life with no antagonist to face you; no one will know what you were capable of, not
even you yourself.’ For a man needs to be put to the test if he is to
gain self-knowledge; only by trying does he learn what his capacities are.
Consequently some men have presented themselves of their own
accord to misfortune when it is slow to afflict them, seeking to find
an opportunity for their worth to shine out when it is in danger of
falling into obscurity. Sometimes great men delight, I say, in adversity,
just as brave soldiers delight in warfare; I once heard the gladiator
Triumphus in the reign of Tiberius Caesar complaining about the
shortage of shows: ‘What a splendid age has passed away!’ he said.
